The Service
Life Extenders
Our specialty graphites
for the metal industry
SIGRAFINE®

Graphite Materials & Systems

2

SIGRAFINE® HLM-ENOX
Service life nearly doubled
Rotating degassing units are exposed to highly corrosive conditions which restrict
their service life. Consequently, we have developed SIGRAFINE HLM-ENOX, a new type
of material which has proved to extend the unit’s service life by 80 % over standard
materials thanks to its innovative formulation. This characteristic of the material is
unrivalled on the markets and results in significant cost efficiency gains – thereby
positioning HLM-ENOX as a genuine service life extender.

3

4

Our specialty graphites
for the metal industry
When melting, casting and molding in very high
temperature ranges, the requirements of components
and systems rise in line with the greater demands
made on material purity, design, product lifetime and
cost-efficiency. Specialty graphites are increasingly
taking centre stage.

Graphite crucibles

Graphite dies

Continuous casting
Typical applications

• Rounds
• Strips
• Wires
• Profiles

Products of SGL Carbon

• SIGRAFINE®
isostatic, vibration-molded, die-molded and
extruded graphites

Materials used by
SGL Carbon

• Cooling plates
• Dies
• Crucibles
• Casting molds
• Semi-finished products (rounds / squares)

The Service Life Extenders | Overview

5

Your benefits
We support the metal industry with innovative and powerful
materials. Thanks to their technical characteristics, these
materials ensure quality, cost-effectiveness and environmental compatibility, from the achievement of the highest purity
grades through to the streamlining of mechanical processing
and on to saving on flushing gas. In addition, our materials and
products enhance the performance of systems and processes
in numerous applications.

Graphite gas injection tube
Graphite ladle lining

Aluminum treatment
• Refinement of aluminum melts and their alloys

• SIGRAFINE®
isostatic, vibration-molded, die-molded and
extruded graphites
• Gas injection tubes
• Rotating gas distribution systems (shafts, rotors)
• Casting rings
• Ladle linings
• Tapping spouts

6

SIGRAFINE
fine-grain graphites for
continuous casting
®

Our products are designed for different casting
techniques and metals. They invariably impress
with their consistent material characteristics
such as their thermal conductivity, chemical
and thermal resistance and their high strength.

Wide strip die

The Service Life Extenders | Continuous casting

Dimensional accuracy and surface quality
High dimensional accuracy and outstanding surface quality are
crucial for dies used in continuous casting
Broad range of applications
Our dies are used in vertical, horizontal and up-casting.
The molds are suitable for melting various metals and alloys:
copper, aluminum bronze, tin bronze, brass, nickel silver,
cupro-nickel and precious metal as well as special alloys.
Exceptional range of formats and special dimensions
We supply round dies from 150 mm to 450 mm in diameter – up
to 1100 mm for special dimensions. In the case of strip dies and
square dies, the dimensions range from 330 x 510 x 1230 mm to
410 x 200 x 1550 mm.
We make all dies to customer designs and specifications to
the utmost precision, thereby achieving extremely low surface
roughness and consistent material quality.
Proven parameters
We will advise you on the selection of the right grade of graphite.
We take all the decisive factors into account, such as the
characteristics of the metal or alloy to be cast, the desired
shape and its dimensions, the volume of metal to be cast as
well as the design and special conditions of the plant. Therefore, please be sure to contact us at an early stage.

7

Our specialty graphites exhibit
relevant material characteristics:
• Low surface wettability
• Good lubrication properties
• Good thermal conductivity
• High strength
• High thermal and chemical
resistance
• Excellent thermal shock
resistance
• Low thermal expansion
• Good workability

8

SIGRAFINE®
specialty graphites for
aluminum treatment
Thanks to their material properties such as extreme
corrosion resistance and stability at high temperatures
and temperature shocks, our specialty graphites are ideal
materials for gas flushing treatments and contribute to a
significant service life extension.

SIGRAFINE casting rings for the production
of aluminum rounds

The Service Life Extenders | Aluminum treatment

9

Gases used for flushing
aluminum melts
Chlorine
Chlorine has long ranked as the most common flushing gas
for the chemical and concurrent mechanical cleaning of any
aluminum melt present. This gas is used particularly for
recycled aluminum.
Nitrogen
Nitrogen effects the mechanical cleaning of aluminum melts
both through the flow initiated and through partial pressure
difference. This is absolutely sufficient for many requirements.
In practice, it is usually combined with other gases (up to 5 %
chlorine).
↑ SIGRAFINE rotor heads for rotating gas distribution systems

Flushing enhances quality
In the casting of aluminum melts, gas flushing treatments can
deliver significant quality improvements.
This is mainly achieved by reducing the hydrogen content and
oxidic impurities. This type of cleaning avoids cracks and cavities, resulting in good mold-filling properties and ensuring that
the casting exhibits a dense structure, free of pores.
The role of graphite
Gas injection tubes and gas distribution systems made of
graphite are particularly well suited to this type of cleaning as
the graphite proves resistant to the gases utilized (flushing
gases), namely chlorine, nitrogen and argon as well as their
mixtures and further aggregates.

Argon
While this gas achieves a good flushing effect, hardly any alloy
components are removed. Here, too, it is usually combined
with chlorine, particularly if rotating gas injection systems are
employed.

10

Specialty graphites
for degassing tubes
and gas distribution
systems
Thermal, mechanical and chemical stability
When immersed in the melt, the graphite component is raised
from room temperature to several hundred degrees Celsius
in fractions of a second. At the same time, it is subjected to
the cold flushing gases. The application itself requires a high
degree of strength as the rotating gas distribution systems
are immersed in the melt while turning. In addition, chemical
resistance to the highly corrosive environment must be guaranteed.

Advantages of our specialty
graphites in flushing with gas
•R
 esistant to fast changes
in temperature
•S
 tability at high operating
temperatures
•R
 esistance to molten metals
and highly corrosive flushing
gases

Improvement in service life thanks to material benefits
In addition, our HLM-NOX and HLM-ENOX brands exhibit low
permeability and non-wettability by non-ferrous metal
melts. This combination of properties leads to demonstrable
improvements in service life of up to 180 %.

↑ Rotating degassing unit

The Service Life Extenders | Aluminum treatment

11

↑ Heating element block for degassing systems

Your preferential partner for a wide variety of systems and
requirements
Thanks to our extensive, in-depth knowledge in the development of anti-oxidation impregnations in connection with our
standard portfolio, we offer solutions for systems of all sizes.
In addition, we are experienced design partners when it comes
to effective solutions for gas flushing treatments. We will also
provide active support as your partner in trouble shooting for
any possible faults.
We enable special dimensions
Electrodes for roughing up aluminum surfaces represent a
good example of the capabilities of our standard portfolio.
Here we are capable of realising lengths of up to 2,900 mm.
We have also supported the design of crucibles with a format
of 250 x 1000 x 2300 mm.

Innovation in shaping
With our ISO trademark R4800 - which is also deployed in the
aluminum industry - we have developed a brand considered
to be unrivalled on the markets. This specialty graphite which
is used for the production of casting rings for casting tables,
significantly improves the accuracy of the shaping stage in
the manufacture of cast aluminum ingots – particularly when
considering the surface quality of the ingot cast. Consequently,
all leading systems manufacturers (OEMs) are relying on R4800
today.

12

SIGRAFINE®
fine-grain graphites for
melt treatment
Whether 2.75 meter electrode for tapping tasks or a
variety of linings for very different underlying conditions –
our products impress with their extreme resistance
and reliability. In addition, you will benefit from our
extensive experience in calculation and design geared
to achieving the longest possible service life.

Lining
of crucibles

The Service Life Extenders | Melt treatment

13

Cost-effectiveness factor
In view of the high cost of mining ore, the following process
steps are of decisive economic relevance for the metal industry. The challenge is to extract the maximum amount of metal
from the mined material.

Properties of our fine graphites

Graphite is first choice in thermal processes
Mechanical, chemical and thermal treatments and extraction
processes can all be used for this purpose. In the case of
thermal processes, graphite is the material of choice and it
plays a decisive role thanks to its specific material properties.

• High thermal shock resistance

• Resistant to high application
temperatures
• Low wettability
• Low permeability
• Good value for money

The use of graphite is ideal as its thermal conductivity falls as melting temperatures rise.
Relative thermal conductivity RT (value = 1)
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
500
Temperature [°C]

1000

1500

2000

2500

3000

14

Electrodes for tapping the furnace

↑ Tapping electrode

A tough task
The melt is poured into ladles via tapping spouts. The furnace
must first be opened, however, by means of tapping electrodes
(stinger pencils). The charged electrodes with a diameter of 75
millimeters and a length of 2,750 millimeters create an arc which
discharges the refractory material at the prescribed opening
thereby enabling the melt to run off.

2.75 meters – our manufacturing master class
The manufacture of stinger pencils presents a major challenge
as these extremely long, thin objects can easily bend. Based
on our experience with the material and in manufacturing,
we developed a type of graphite in which the tendency to sag
remains under 0.5 cm in terms of the total length – clearly the
top performer in its class.

The Service Life Extenders | Melt treatment

15

Advantages of our tapping
electrode of SIGRAFINE
fine-grain graphite
The combination of material and length we offer
allows:

• it to be guided precisely to the
opening by the operator
• a greater safety distance from
the furnace to be maintained
Further advantages are:

• Uniform resistance and
arcing behavior
• Less time spent on changing
the electrode
• Longer cycle times
• Easy workability for
establishing contact

16

Lining elements and heat-retaining electrodes
Our specific graphite types for varying conditions
Depending on the parameters of the melt process and the
properties of the metal or alloy concerned, different grades
of graphite will be suitable for the lining. We offer a broad
range of graphite types including variable post-impregnation
grades and dimensions, an notably large formats such as
600 x 600 x 3300 mm and 500 x 500 x 2750 mm.
Benefit from our extensive, in-depth knowledge of materials
and processes
With recommendations on the design of the liners and their
assembly, we can help in optimizing processes and ultimately
extending service lives. The number of castings can be substantially increased by the following factors:

↑ Tapping spout

Fireproof and chemically resistant
Once poured off, the melt flows into the designated ladle. To
protect its steel body, it is given a lining of refractory material.
Graphite is the preferred material for this purpose although,
it must be ensured that it does not bond with the melt as impurities must absolutely be avoided. Moreover, the formation of a
bond with the refractory cement which fixes the graphite lining
in the steel body must not be put at risk.

• The number of liners spread over the area of the ladle
• The design of the base plates taking account of their
assembly options on site
• avoidance of gaps between liner and base
• Detection of premature wear and tear through oxidation and
taking counteractive measures through design changes
• Selection of the right grade of graphite depending on the
melt conditions
We also supply linings of hard coal which are required for certain
process conditions. Here, too, we can realize the same formats
and offer advice on design.

The Service Life Extenders | Melt treatment

↑ Heat retention electrode

Heat retention electrodes
The melt has to be kept warm after processing in order to avoid
any change in viscosity or premature stiffening. Heat-retaining
electrodes are used for this purpose. Our rounds of extruded
fine-grain graphite are particularly well suited for such assignments.

Calculation and design
The preceding electrical calculation has a substantial influence on the design of the finished piece. This calculation
follows the following steps:
• identify the existing electrical supply (transformer)
• determine the graphite grades available
• calculate the electrical resistance
From these steps we develop a proposal for the design,
taking the spatial conditions on site into account.
Optimized service life
In the case of heat-retaining electrodes, their service life
can be significantly increased by the choice of the right
grade of graphite as well as further treatments such as an
anti-oxidation impregnation.

17

18

SIGRAFINE®
specialty graphites for
powder metallurgy
For the manufacture of cutting tools and polycrystalline
diamonds, we offer a broad range of equipment parts
and shaping elements which impress with their excellent
thermal and chemical properties.

Small boats made of SIGRAFINE fine-grain graphite for
thermal treatment in the powder metal industry

The Service Life Extenders | Aluminum treatment

Relevance of graphite
For the manufacture of cutting tools from hard metal powder
in the machining industry as well as for mold making, charging
containers are mainly required (so-called sintering trays or
sinter boats). Their manufacture involves fine-grained graphite. In addition, we offer the entire range of equipment for the
furnaces utilized in making the powder:
• Ladles
• Furnace muffles
• Linings
• Heating elements
• Combinations of carbon fibres and extruded graphite
• Thermal insulation (hard felts and film)
A single source provider
The material quality of our products is complemented by our
extensive, in-depth knowledge of the pressure sintering
process and the handling of high pressures and temperatures.
For example, we also design the necessary components and
supply the necessary calculations.
Manufacture of polycrystalline diamonds
Thanks to their sound properties, our graphites are also used
for the manufacture of polycrystalline industrial diamonds
(drill bits, PDC). The form for the actual drill head is determined
from extruded graphite. Involving the addition of hard metal
powder and high temperatures, the drill head is made from
tungsten carbide. In this way, a matrix composite is created
from hard metal and industrial diamond, a system consisting
of carrier and cutter. We opt for isostatically pressed graphites
to form the thread (details). This composite and the design
affect the speed with which the drill head is able to remove
the underlying rock, sand, etc. (rate of penetration, ROP).

19

Properties of our
SIGRAFINE specialty graphites
• High dimensional stability
• High oxidation resistance
• Homogeneous material
structure
• Good thermal conductivity
and consistent electrical
resistance
Our fine-grain graphites all stand for high mechanical
strength, good lubrication properties as well as low
static charge. Our purification furnaces, operated for
this specific purpose, guarantee the purification levels
our customers demand.

The diamonds are pressure sintered with a mixture of highly
purified graphite powders and nickel, cobalt or iron. 5000 bar
and 2000 °C are required for the synthesis. We use extruded
graphite grades with multiple impregnations, low ash content
as well as graphite foil. We can also offer coating solutions if
needed.
Variety and service
In accordance with the wide-ranging application areas, we
offer components manufactured for special customer requirements, as well as tailored solutions developed together with
our customers to meet specific demands.

20

Successful
together
We do not just manufacture products,
but also provide intelligent solutions
with sustainable benefits for our
customers.
Close collaboration and an understanding of specific requirements allow us
to develop forward-looking solutions
and respond to specific needs.
This is how most of our innovations and solutions come about
– such as a device for the integrated installation of linings in
ladles.

The Service Life Extenders | Successful together

21

36 in one go
One of our customers used 36 linings of SIGRAFINE
fine-grain graphite that we manufactured and
supplied for lining their steel ladles; the linings were
individually fitted to the interior wall of the ladle.
In order to reduce the risk of damaging the linings
during installation or replacement as far as possible,
the customer asked us to change the design for
fitting the linings, a change that was intended to
avoid the necessity to fit each lining individually.
We developed an integrated hoisting system in
which all the linings are already joined together
outside the ladle and then moved into the ladle
as a unit and fitted there.
In this way, we were able to offer a solution to the
customer’s request that not only minimized possible installation damage but also saved a considerable amount of time, thereby helping to boost the
efficiency of the production processes involved.

22

Smart
Solutions
Be it materials, components or production
processes, we focus our thinking and actions on
the customer and keep an eye on the big picture.
Our solutions already anticipate the future today.
The following examples show a selection of our
unique product range.

Mobility
• Lightweight components and structural parts
based on fiber-reinforced composites for automotive and aerospace manufacture
• Graphite anode material for lithium-ion batteries
in electric vehicles
• Carbon-ceramic brake disks for sports cars and
luxury sedans

Energy
• High-temperature solutions based on specialty
graphites and fiber materials for the photovoltaic
industry
• Carbon fiber materials for rotor blades
• Gas diffusion layers for fuel cells
• Systems for more efficient heat exchange and
heat recovery
• Carbon fibers for pressurized gas containers

Digitization
• Carbon, graphite, and CFC components for
polysilicon and monocrystal pulling in the
semiconductor industry
• High precision, coated graphite carriers for the
production of LEDs
→ State-of-the-art green production with
the world’s largest isostatic press

SGL Carbon

23

SGL Carbon
We are leaders in the development and manufacture of products based on carbon, graphite,
carbon fibers, and fiber-reinforced composites.
In partnership with our customers, we develop
intelligent, trendsetting, and sustainable
solutions that deliver a clear benefit.
With our in-depth material, engineering, and
application know-how, we make a substantial
contribution to the major future topics mobility,
energy, and digitization.

Contact
Europe / Middle East / Africa
SGL CARBON GmbH
Drachenburgstrasse 1
53170 Bonn/Germany
gms-europe@sglcarbon.com
Americas
SGL CARBON LLC
900 Theresia Street
PA 15857 St. Marys/USA
gms-americas@sglcarbon.com
Asia / Pacific
SGL CARBON Far East Ltd.
151 Huan Chen Dong Lu
Shanghai Fengpu
Industrial Development Zone
201401 Fengxian/China
gms-asia@sglcarbon.com

®

registered trademarks of SGL Carbon SE

This information is based on our present state of
knowledge and is intended to provide general notes
on our products and their uses. It should not therefore
be construed as guaranteeing specific properties
of the products described or their suitability for a
particular application. Any existing industrial property
rights must be observed. The quality of our products is
guaranteed under our “General Conditions of Sale”.

06 2019 / 0.5 E Printed in Germany

Graphite Materials & Systems
SGL CARBON GmbH
Soehnleinstrasse 8
65201 Wiesbaden / Germany
www.sglcarbon.com/gms

